__NOTOC__
The following enumeration is from the cc65 mailing list. The order implies no judgement, it's alphabetically. Feel free to correct entries or add to it as appropriate. The programs should be available to the general public, so while it's nice if you compile all your programs with cc65, this is not the place to list them if they're private.

__TOC__
== Applications ==

=== A2Command ===
[https://github.com/A2Command/a2command] is a filebrowser based on [[Applications written in C or C with assembler#cbm-command|CBM Command]] running on Apple //e, //c, IIgs.

=== A2Stream ===
[https://github.com/oliverschmidt/A2Stream] does glitch-free high-quality internet audio streaming on the Apple II.

=== Breadbox64 ===
[https://web.archive.org/web/20130723162430/http://www.vandenbrande.com/wp/2009/06/breadbox64-a-twitter-client-for-the-c64/ Breadbox64] is a twitter client for the C64 that runs on Contiki. The source is available in the [https://sourceforge.net/p/contikiprojects/code/HEAD/tree/vandenbrande.com/twitter/ Contiki Projects Community].

=== C-Vote ===
[https://paradroid.automac.se/cvote/ C-Vote] is "a computerized voting system for demo parties that runs on C64:s. Of course it's not only limited to demo competitions, and the code is easy to port to other 6502-based platforms supported by the cc65 compiler." (source included)

=== c128_kasse ===
[https://michael.stapelberg.ch/c128_kasse/ c128_kasse] is a Point of Sale application running on C128. (source included)

=== CBM Command ===
[https://github.com/CINJ/CBM-Command CBM Command] is a filebrowser running on C64/C128/VIC20/PET.

=== Contiki ===
The [https://github.com/contiki-os/contiki OS], originally developed by Adam Dunkels was first written using cc65. It has been improved since then and [http://hitmen.c02.at/html/tools_contiki.html ported to many more platforms]. Although today it's focus is on embedded devices a few enthusiasts [https://github.com/oliverschmidt/contiki/releases maintain a version that does still run on 6502 platforms].

=== Contiki BBS ===
[http://retrohackers.com/viewtopic.php?f=10&t=571 Contiki BBS] is a Contiki based telnet server for the C64. The source is available in the [https://sourceforge.net/p/contikiprojects/code/HEAD/tree/ufud.org/contiki-bbs/ Contiki Projects Community].

=== EasyProg ===
Skoe has written a tool named [https://skoe.de/easyflash/doku.php?id=writecrt EasyProg] to program the flash cartridge [https://skoe.de/easyflash/doku.php EasyFlash]. (source included)

=== GuruTerm ===
[https://csdb.dk/release/?id=38908 GuruTerm] is a commodore graphics enabled telnet client for the C64 written in assembler and C.

=== rt65 ===
[http://retrohackers.com/viewtopic.php?f=4&t=417&p=4301&hilit=rt65#p4301 rt65] is a preemptive multitasking kernel/OS written mostly in C with minimal use of assembler.

=== Serial Slave ===
[http://paradroid.automac.se/serslave/ Serial Slave] is "is a system that allows you to use a PC as a virtual disk drive for your C64 or C128. It communicates using RS-232 and doesn't require any custom hardware. The PC server also runs well under multitasking operating systems, so you don't have to dedicate a machine to running Serial Slave. Serial Slave is fast: 3.8 kB/s with a SwiftLink, 11.5 kB/s with a Turbo232 or Silver Surfer, and even 23 kB/s with a SuperCPU if your PC supports 230400 baud."  (source included)

== Games ==

=== 2048 ===
A port of the [https://github.com/nanoflite/2048-cc65 2048] game to cc65. There is a version for the C64 and one for the PET 4032.
Another port is [https://github.com/jeremysrand/apple2048 Apple2048] for the enhanced Apple //e. (source included)

=== A2Bejwld ===
[https://github.com/jeremysrand/a2sudoku A2Bejwld] is an implementation of Sudoku for the Apple II with a Mockingboard. (source included)

=== A2Sudoku ===
[https://github.com/jeremysrand/a2sudoku A2Sudoku] is an implementation of Bejeweled written for the Apple II. (source included)

=== Abandoned Farmhouse Adventure ===
It's a text adventure game in the spirit of similar games that ran on 8-bit microcomputers of the 1970s and 80s. [https://github.com/jefftranter/6502/tree/master/c/adventure GitHub project]

=== Alter Ego ===
[https://shiru.untergrund.net/software.shtml Alter Ego] is a puzzle platformer for the NES written in C/assembler. (source included)

=== CardSwipe ===
[https://csdb.dk/release/?id=98755 CardSwipe] is a card game for the C64.

=== cc65 Chess ===
Portable AI, 1 or 2 player Chess game in C. This for the C64, the Apple II, the Oric-1/Atmos/Telestrat and the Commander X16.
[https://github.com/StewBC/cc65-Chess GitHub project] and [https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=bkA4vtwxaJg Video]

=== Chase ===
This is a game for Nintendo Entertainment System designed by Shiru. [https://github.com/ullman/cc65-nes-chase GitHub project]

=== colourgo ===
[https://github.com/jeremysrand/colourgo colourgo] is a game in the spirit of Chameleon Run for the Apple II. (source included)

=== Critical Match ===
Color matching game for NES by slembcke. [https://github.com/slembcke/critical-match GitHub project]

=== ECKN/ECKN+ ===
Clone of the flash puzzle game 'Znax' with improved score system for Atari-8-Bit computers. The 'plus' version has minor fixes, is NTSC compatible and supports Atari CX77 touch tablet or similar devices (CMI08 PS/2 mouse interface). [http://a8.fandal.cz/search.php?search=ECKN Download] and [https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=KnwpMZAuxZo Video]

=== GNU Sudoku ===
[https://csdb.dk/release/?id=29472 GNU Sudoku] is a port of the well known game to the C64.

=== Manic Miner ===
Remake of Manic Miner by Matthew Smith from 1983.  This for the C64 and C128. [https://github.com/StewBC/manicminer GitHub project] and [https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=_3_V-8X8J5o Video] (source included)

=== NESert Golfing ===
A 2D golf game by Brad Smith for NES. [https://github.com/bbbradsmith/NESertGolfing GitHub project] and [https://rainwarrior.itch.io/nesert-golfing itch.io page]

=== Portris ===
A portable game which is somewhat similar to Tetris. [https://github.com/mrdudz/portris GitHub project]

=== Skye's Castle ===
It's a sequel to [[Applications written in C or C with assembler#Abandoned_Farmhouse_Adventure|The Abandoned Farmhouse Adventure]], a text adventure game in the spirit of similar games that ran on 8-bit microcomputers of the 1970s and 80s. [https://github.com/jefftranter/6502/tree/master/c/adventure2 GitHub project]

=== Snake Byte ===
Remake of Snake Byte by Sirius Software first published in 1982.  This for the C64 with a conio port.
[https://github.com/StewBC/snakebyte GitHub project] and [https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=H7Y4HVXVzoI Video]

=== Solitaire ===
The Atari Lynx [https://atarigamer.com/lynx/game/Solitaire/267586633 Solitaire] (source included) contains three games:
* Klondike (1 and 3 cards at a time)
* Freecell
* Spider

=== The Potion ===
[https://csdb.dk/release/?id=9392 The Potion] is a text adventure for the C64 written in C/assembler. (source included)

=== UWOL - Quest for Money ===
[https://csdb.dk/release/?id=93409 UWOL - Quest for Money] is a jump'n'run game written in C and Assembler, ported from the Spectrum version.
There is also [https://github.com/mojontwins/SuperUwol_NES SuperUwol] for the NES/Famicom. (source included)

=== Wumpus 65 ===
[https://csdb.dk/release/?id=95850 Wumpus 65] is a text adventure written in C. runs on C64/C128/plus4/pet. (source included)

=== YUM ===
This is a computer version of the game YUM, similar to games known as Yahtzee, Yacht and Generala. [https://github.com/jefftranter/6502/tree/master/c/yum GitHub project]

=== Zoo Mania ===
The C64 game [https://csdb.dk/release/?id=102217 Zoo Mania] was written in C/assembler. (source included)

== Demos ==

=== BCC #3 Party Scroller ===
[https://csdb.dk/release/?id=79461 BCC #3 Party Scroller] is a C64 demo by C64 club berlin. (source included)

=== Bunkerparty 2008 Invitation ===
[https://csdb.dk/release/?id=64202 Bunkerparty 2008 Invitation] is a C64 demo by Dienstagstreff.

=== MatrixCevi ===
[https://csdb.dk/release/?id=21038 MatrixCevi] is a simple "Matrix effect" for the C64 written in C. (source included)

=== Minicast ===
[http://hitmen.c02.at/html/tools_cc65.html Minicast] is an interactive raycasting demo for the C64 written in C which makes extensive use of inline assembly. (source included)

=== Se gitai o Ilios ===
[https://csdb.dk/release/?id=56368 Se gitai o Ilios] is a C64 demo by Cascade. (source included)

== Misc ==

=== 1541 Ultimate ===
The 1.x firmware of the [http://1541ultimate.net 1541 Ultimate] uses cc65 to build the menu program, which is written in C.

=== 8bit-Unity ===
[http://8bit-unity.com 8bit-Unity], a game SDK for 80s computers. Write your game only once and then deploy it on all platforms. ([https://github.com/8bit-Dude/8bit-Unity source] included)

=== brainfuck64 ===
[https://github.com/gergoerdi/brainfuck64 brainfuck64] is a Brainfuck compiler that runs on the Commodore 64 (or any 6502-based computer supported by cc65 that has enough RAM).

=== Chameleon ===
The boot loader and menu program of the [http://wiki.icomp.de/wiki/Chameleon Chameleon] are written using a combination of assembler and C.

=== Chip-8 Emulator ===
[https://csdb.dk/release/?id=17306 Chip-8 Emulator] is a Chip-8 Emulator for the C64 written in C and assembler.

=== CurtaSim ===
[https://github.com/jeremysrand/CurtaSim CurtaSim] is a simulation of the Curta mechanical calculator written for the Apple II. (source included)

=== Eliza 65 ===
[https://csdb.dk/release/?id=95792 Eliza 65] is a port of the well known Eliza program. (source included)

=== IP65 ===
[https://github.com/cc65/ip65/wiki IP65] is a TCP/IP stack for 6502 based computers. The actual TCP/IP stack is written in assembler, but various programs coming with IP65 are written in C.

=== mocklib ===
The [https://github.com/jeremysrand/mocklib mocklib] is a support library for the Apple II Mockingboard. (source included)

=== picoOS ===
The original [http://picoos.sourceforge.net/ports/6502 pico<nowiki>]</nowiki>OS 1.0.4 for 6502] is a real-time operating system by Dennis Kuschel. (source included; can be built by cc65 versions 2.13 and 2.14)

Ari Suutari has updated it to [https://github.com/AriZuu/picoos pico<nowiki>]</nowiki>OS 1.1.0] which can be built by cc65 versions 2.15 and later.

=== VICE ===
No, the famous [http://vice-emu.sourceforge.net Commodore emulator VICE] was not compiled with cc65 :&ndash;) But, some of the test programs are, as Marco van den Heuvel writes on the mailing list: "The joystick (including userport) test-program(s) in the VICE testprogs directory of the svn is done using cc65 (source included)."