__NOTOC__
You are free to use whatever emulator and related software works for you, but the following have been tested and work. This guide will assume you are using these pieces of software.

== Tools ==
=== AppleCommander ===
Download the latest <b>AppleCommander</b> from here: https://github.com/AppleCommander/AppleCommander/releases

''Note:'' The AppleCommander versions with -ac- in the file name are command line versions. The versions with -linux-, -win64- or -macosx- are the versions with a user interface. The user-inetrface versions can be used as command line versions as well, by adding the command-line parameters when executing. The user-interface will be used once to prepare a ProDOS disk.

=== Java ===
Java is needed for AppleCommander, which is used to work with disk images. Download from: https://java.com/download/

''Note on Windows:'' On my x64 machine, the Java downloaded was a 32-bit Java which did not work for the win64 AppleCommander. I had to download the 64-bit version from the manual download page, and that works with AppleCommander-win64-1.5.0.jar. I found the manual download page here: https://www.java.com/en/download/manual.jsp

== Emulators ==
=== Windows ===
AppleWin - Excellent and free - https://github.com/AppleWin/AppleWin/releases

AppleWin is open source, is actively being developed and feature rich. Most importantly to developers, it has a great debugger built in.
=== Linux ===
I tried linapple (free) and was able to load a dsk image and play some games.

https://github.com/linappleii/linapple

''Note:'' I was able to run AppleWin in Wine on Ubuntu and that worked perfectly.
=== macOS ===
(free) Microm8 worked for me - https://paleotronic.com/software/microm8/

(not free) Virtual ][ seems really good - https://www.virtualii.com/
== Install ==
Install the files anywhere on your system but '''note the path''', especially for AppleCommander.

=== [https://github.com/cc65/wiki/wiki/Apple-II-2.-Compiling-%22C%22-for-the-Apple-II Next: 2. Compiling “C” for the Apple II] ===
