== Apple II ==

=== CCFA ===
[https://dreher.net/projects/CFforAppleII/downloads/CFforAppleII_Manual_1.0.pdf CFFA] is a CompactFlash Interface for Apple II. The reference manual contains in appendix 1 the firmware listing.

=== Manic Miner ===
[https://github.com/StewBC/mminer-apple2/ Manic Miner] is a remake of the 1983 ZX Spectrum game by Matthew Smith and Bug Byte.

=== Penetrator ===
[https://github.com/StewBC/penetrator-apple2/ Penetrator] is a remake of the 1982 ZX Spectrum game by Phillip Mitchell and Beam Software.

=== VM02 ===
[https://sourceforge.net/projects/vm02/ VM02] is a Java compatible environment for the Apple II series of computers. Most basic features of a Java VM are implemented to allow direct execution of standard Java class files on a 64K, 8 bit, 1 MHz Apple II computer. (source included)

== Atari 8-bit machines ==

=== seitensprung ===
"seitensprung" is an ASCII/Windows-1252 text viewer with proportional font support for Atari 8-bit machines. [https://atariage.com/forums/topic/157385-release-of-seitensprung-v015-5th-place-abbuc-sc/ Download/Video]

== Commodore 64 ==

=== Cypherbasic ===
[https://github.com/silizium/cypherbasic Cypherbasic] is a BASIC extension for the Commodore 64 with a lot of useful functions for classic cryptography 

=== G-Pascal ===
[https://web.archive.org/web/20170324234712/http://kildall.apana.org.au/~cjb/G-Pascal/ G-Pascal] is a Pascal compiler of 1983, call SYS 32768. (184 KB source included)

=== Krill's Loader ===
[https://csdb.dk/release/?id=78348 Krill's Loader] is an advanced IRQ fastloader for the C64 supporting many different drives.

=== Outlaw game ===
[ftp://ftp.groessler.org/pub/chris/cc65/outlaw.tar.gz Outlaw] is a simple clone of the game with the same name for the Atari 2600 console.

== Commodore VIC-20 ==

=== SID Vicious ===
[https://www.dropbox.com/sh/7m0d1nfrwujtmd4/AAAhehcmONEziJM8MMI8EAdUa SID Vicious] is a SID emulator for the VIC-20 by Aleksi Eeben. Output pulse wave, triangle, sawtooth, noise with ADSR envelopes at 6.1 kHz. (source included)

== Commander X16 ==

=== Penetrator ===
[https://github.com/StewBC/penetrator/ Penetrator] is a remake of the 1982 ZX Spectrum game by Phillip Mitchell and Beam Software.

== Nintendo Entertainment System ==

=== 240p test suite ===
The [https://github.com/pinobatch/240p-test-mini 240p Test Suite] turns an NES into a test pattern generator to evaluate the quality of a TV or upscaler. (On GitHub)

=== Concentration Room ===
[https://github.com/pinobatch/croom-nes Concentration Room] is a card matching game for NES. (On GitHub)

=== DABG ===
[https://github.com/NovaSquirrel/DABG Double Action Blaster Guys] is an arcade-style platformer for the NES that plays similarly to ''Bubble Bobble''. (On GitHub)

=== Lizard ===
[https://github.com/bbbradsmith/lizard_src_demo Lizard] by Brad Smith is an exploration platformer for the NES. (On GitHub; requires non-free assets available separately)

=== NESLife ===
[https://github.com/NovaSquirrel/NESLife NESLife] is a Conway's Life simulator for NES. (On GitHub)

=== Pently ===
[https://github.com/pinobatch/pently Pently] is a text-based music player for NES, with a text-based input format similar to MML or LilyPond. (On GitHub)

=== RHDE: Furniture Fight ===
[https://github.com/pinobatch/rhde-nes RHDE: Furniture Fight] is an interior decoration real-time strategy game for NES for two players. (On GitHub)

=== Sliding Blaster ===
[https://github.com/NovaSquirrel/SlidingBlaster Sliding Blaster] is an overhead shooter for NES with mouse support for 1 or 2 players. (On GitHub)

=== Thwaite ===
[https://github.com/pinobatch/thwaite-nes Thwaite] is a missile defense game for NES. (source included)

=== Zap Ruder ===
[https://pineight.com/nes/#ruder Zap Ruder] is a test suite for the Zapper light gun. It includes ZapPing (a paddle and ball game), a music toy, and several test cards. (source included)
