These instructions provide a step-by-step guide to building and installing cc65 on [https://getfedora.org Fedora] Linux.

== Step 1: Install Dependencies ==

The following command not only installs the necessary tools to build the cc65 executable programs, it also installs all the tools to build the documentation.

<pre>
sudo dnf install git gcc make linuxdoc-tools texinfo
</pre>

== Step 2: Create a Place for the Source Code ==

If you don't have a "git" directory, create it with the below commands. You don't need to create a ~/git/cc65 directory because that will be done automatically by git.

<pre>
cd ~
mkdir git
cd git
</pre>

== Step 3: Retrieve the Source Code ==

From the ~/git directory, enter the following command to download the cc65 code from github.com. A cc65 subdirectory will automatically be created.

<pre>
git clone https://github.com/cc65/cc65.git
</pre>

== Step 4: Build the Compiler from Source ==

The build process works flawlessly on Fedora. Simply type:

<pre>
cd cc65
make
</pre>

== Step 5: Build the Documentation ==

You will want to refer to the documentation. It will be quicker to access it
locally. Build it with this command:

<pre>
PREFIX=/usr/local make doc
</pre>

== Step 6: Install the Compiler ==

The below command installs the following:

* Executables in /usr/local/bin
* Documentation in info format in /usr/local/share/info. View it with the command: info /usr/local/share/info/index.info
* Documentation in HTML format in /usr/local/share/doc/cc65/html.

<pre>
sudo PREFIX=/usr/local make install
</pre>

== Step 7: Bookmark the Documentation ==

To be successful working with software development tools you need quick access to the documentation. I keep a very organized set of bookmarks in my browser so that I can quickly get answers to questions that come up during development. One can waste a lot of time looking for information if it is not readily available. So I suggest creating a bookmark in your browser for the following local file which is the starting point for the cc65 documentation in HTML format.

In Firefox you can press Ctrl-O to open a file. Enter the below path. Then bookmark it with Ctrl-D.

<pre>
/usr/local/share/doc/cc65/html/index.html
</pre>
