Things that might be considered to be evaluated/implemented/included...

== Compiler ==
* Fix standard compliance problems in the preprocessor.
* Braces in initializers work in a non-standard way; standard-compliant initializers with braces are not always accepted.
* Fix an issue with <code>goto</code> into a block that declares a local label.
* Make <code>fastcall</code> the standard function-calling protocol.
* [[Roadmap|Floating-point support]]

== Assembler ==
* Implement "weak" symbols.
* Add a <code>widthof()</code> function that returns the number of bytes in the address of a symbol.
* Add <code>-W error</code> option (and use it in the C library Makefile).

== Linker ==
* Fix issues with the o65 format.
* Map files do not work for o65 output in the presence of o65-external symbols. 
* Add an option to omit the generation of output files if the file length is zero (useful for unused overlays).
* Intel hex output.
* Segment overlays.

== Disassembler ==

== Compile & Link Utility ==
* Add capability to call other external programs for processing, for example, Pucrunch.

== Platform-independent run-time libraries ==
* Complete multiplication and division routines. Currently, it's somewhat a mess. Especially, <code>cc65_imul8x8r16()</code> is missing.
* The changes in the TGI library need a review and cleanup. The new vector font routines need testing, docs., and maybe a sample program. Clipping is probably not implemented (needs check).
* There's a function <code>tgi_imulround()</code> -- declared in <tt>tgi.h</tt> -- that can be used with <code>tgi_getaspectratio()</code> to scale a value "up" by the aspect ratio. However, it is desirable to be able to scale "down", as well, by the aspect ratio -- maybe with a function called <code>tgi_idivround()</code>.
* Implement an alternative "naive" heap manager that simply increments a pointer for every allocation (and, doesn't actually de-allocate anything), to allow, e.g., the module loader to be used without linking in the full-blown heap manager.
* Discuss if it is desirable to have standard SER and/or EMD drivers -- like the standard JOY, MOU, and TGI drivers.
* Several formats in <code>printf()</code> are broken: <code>printf("%04d",-12)</code> and <code>printf("%#04x",12)</code> are examples.
* Abstract printer support.

== CBM library ==
* Implement the DIO interface.
* Implement a Userport SER driver based on George Hug's 'Toward 2400' source code -- [http://archive.org/details/transactor-magazines-v9-i03].
* Remove prepending "0:" / "1:" to POSIX filenames -- [http://cc65.github.io/cc65/mailarchive/2012-08/10683.html].
* Review handling of O_... flags in POSIX <code>open()</code>.

== C64 library ==
* Implement OUTTEXT in the TGI driver.
* Implement Soft-80 CONIO support as an "extra" .o file that "overrides" the <tt>cputc.o</tt> in the C library.
* Add extra EMD and joystick drivers.

== C128 library ==
* If possible, do that "blinding" of the keyboard scanner while any button/switch is active, which was done for the C64-1351 driver, for the C128-1351 driver, too.
* Implement OUTTEXT in the TGI drivers.
* Find ways to increase the RAM size available to cc65 programs.
* Test EM drivers with the <tt>multidemo</tt> sample; and, fix the broken ones.

== CBM510 library ==
* Make a TGI driver, based on the C64 driver.

== Apple II library ==
* Implement <code>lseek()</code>.
* Update documentation to reflect the current linker configs.
* Have the EM driver detect AUXMEM, and co&ouml;perate with /RAM.
* Implement a TGI driver that "hides" the hires screen, using AUXMEM.
* Allow <code>_sys()</code> to call ROM routines.
* Add command-line support to <code>exec()</code>.
* Add support for a visible cursor in <code>cgetc()</code>.

== Atari library ==
* Add <code>dio_query_sectcount()</code> to complete the DIO implementation.
** algorithm as follows (see [http://cc65.github.io/cc65/mailarchive/2012-10/10974.html]):
*** Read the 4th sector. (The xf551 drive had a bug, it returned the wrong PERCOM info after reading the normally 128-byte boot sectors; a read from sector 4 eliminates that chance).
*** Read the status (SIO command 0x53), and save that info.
*** Request a PERCOM block. If it succeeds, use that information.
*** If reading the PERCOM block fails, assume 1050, 810, (or even 815), or compatible. Use the status byte 0 to differentiate between single, enhanced (medium), and double density. (bit 5 is set if double density, and bit 7 is set if enhanced density). If we're looking for only the sector count, only bit 7 matters.
* Implement the functions in <code>device.h</code>; and, test them with <tt>samples/enumdevdir.c</tt>.
* Implement <code>exec()</code>.
* Implement 80-column CONIO support targeting the XEP80 interface module. Possibly as an "extra" .o file that "overrides" <tt>cputc.o</tt> in the C library.

== GEOS library ==
* Make <code>dio_query_sectcount()</code> less naive.
* Adjust the MOU driver to the current MOU kernel interface.
* Implement the functions in <code>device.h</code>; and, test them with <tt>samples/enumdevdir.c</tt>.

== Documentation ==
* The BGI → TGI font converter doesn't have docs.
* Update a font engine sample 'tgi-preview'.

== Other stuff ==
* Integrate Groepaz's test suite; and, do nightly automated tests to improve the overall quality.
