== Driver classification ==
{| class="wikitable"
! Platform !! driver !! double page !! best colors !! best resolution !! default driver
|-
! rowspan="2" | Apple II,
<nowiki>[Apple IIe]</nowiki> || a2[e].hi.tgi || ✓      || &nbsp; || ✓      || ✓
|-
| a2[e].lo.tgi        || &nbsp; || ✓      || &nbsp; || &nbsp;
|-
! rowspan="15" | Atari,
<nowiki/>[AtariXL] || atr[x]3.tgi      || &nbsp; || &nbsp; || &nbsp; || &nbsp;
|-
| atr[x]4.tgi         || &nbsp; || &nbsp; || &nbsp; || &nbsp;
|-
| atr[x]5.tgi         || &nbsp; || &nbsp; || &nbsp; || &nbsp;
|-
| atr[x]6.tgi         || &nbsp; || &nbsp; || &nbsp; || &nbsp;
|-
| atr[x]7.tgi         || &nbsp; || &nbsp; || &nbsp; || &nbsp;
|-
| atr[x]8.tgi         || &nbsp; || &nbsp; || ✓      || ✓
|-
| atr[x]8p2.tgi       || ✓      || &nbsp; || ✓      || &nbsp;
|-
| atr[x]9.tgi         || &nbsp; || ✓      || &nbsp; || &nbsp;
|-
| atr[x]9p2.tgi       || ✓      || ✓      || &nbsp; || &nbsp;
|-
| atr[x]10.tgi        || &nbsp; || &nbsp; || &nbsp; || &nbsp;
|-
| atr[x]10p2.tgi      || ✓      || &nbsp; || &nbsp; || &nbsp;
|-
| atr[x]11.tgi        || &nbsp; || ✓      || &nbsp; || &nbsp;
|-
| atr[x]14.tgi        || &nbsp; || &nbsp; || &nbsp; || &nbsp;
|-
| atr[x]15.tgi        || &nbsp; || &nbsp; || &nbsp; || &nbsp;
|-
| atr[x]15p2.tgi      || ✓      || &nbsp; || &nbsp; || &nbsp;
|-
! rowspan="2" | Oric Atmos     || atmos-228-200-3.tgi     || &nbsp; || ✓      || &nbsp; || &nbsp;
|-
| atmos-240-200-2.tgi     || &nbsp; || &nbsp; || ✓      || ✓
|-
! rowspan="2" | Oric Telestrat || telestrat-228-200-3.tgi || &nbsp; || ✓      || &nbsp; || &nbsp;
|-
| telestrat-240-200-2.tgi || &nbsp; || &nbsp; || ✓      || ✓
|-
! Commander X16    || cx320p1.tgi         || &nbsp; || ✓      || ✓      || ✓
|-
! rowspan="3" | Commodore 128    || c128-hi.tgi         || &nbsp; || ✓      || &nbsp; || &nbsp;
|-
| c128-vdc.tgi        || &nbsp; || ✓      || &nbsp; || ✓
|-
| c128-vdc2.tgi       || &nbsp; || ✓      || ✓      || &nbsp;
|-
! Commodore 64     || c64-hi.tgi          || &nbsp; || ✓      || ✓      || ✓
|-
! Commodore VIC-20 || vic20-hi.tgi        || &nbsp; || ✓      || ✓      || ✓
|-
! GEOS             || geos-tgi.tgi        || &nbsp; || ✓      || ✓      || ✓
|-
! Atari Lynx       || lynx-160-102-16.tgi || ✓      || ✓      || ✓      || ✓
|-
! Nintendo<br/>
Entertainment<br/>
System             || nes-64-56-2.tgi     || &nbsp; || ✓      || ✓      || ✓
|}

== TGI bitmap fonts ==
* The starting co-ordinates of characters are: Lower left corner (not baseline).
* Drawing is done transparently (meaning that non-glyph "background" pixels are left as they are).
* A driver states, via a bit in the header, if it supports 8.8 fixed-point scaling (or only integer scaling).
* Based on that bit (and the already existing integer x and y size values), the TGI kernel does clipping on character granularity.
* The parameters to the OUTTEXT driver entry point are no C string but kind of a Pascal string in order to facilitate copy-free clipping for TGI kernel.
More details can be found in [http://cc65.github.io/mailarchive/2011-07/index.html#9551 the mailing list archive].

== TGI driver aspect ratio values ==
Terminology according to [http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Pixel_aspect_ratio]:
* Pixel aspect ratio (PAR)
* Display aspect ratio (DAR)
* Storage aspect ratio (SAR)

The three values are related by the identity SAR × PAR = DAR.

* DAR is presumed as 4:3 for CRTs.
* SAR is defined as the x resolution divided by y resolution of the TGI driver.
* PAR is what we want in the TGI driver header field.

The PAR in the TGI driver headers is set to the (rounded) result derived from the the above DAR and SAR.
